{:title "Lazy sequences and streams"
 :date "2013-01-25"
 :layout :post}

Functional languages have the notion of *lazy sequences*, which are an abstraction of infinite sequences that are stored using a small, finite amount of memory.
It would be wasteful to realize an entire infinite sequence before even using it.
The basic idea is to only call the function that generates the sequence when needed, and cache the results.
With lazy sequences, you don't blow the stack and the elements in the sequence are not recalculated everytime.

Let's look at how the two most popular and functional JVM languages handle lazy sequences.

<!--more-->

Clojure has the `lazy-seq` macro to create lazy sequences.
Since most functions are lazy in Clojure, sequences generated by these functions are also lazy.
Here's how the Fibonacci sequence is implemented in Clojure.

```Clojure
(def fibo-seq
  (map first
    (iterate (fn [[a b]] [b (+ a b)]) [0N 1N])))

(defn fibo-list [n]
  (take n fibo-seq))

(defn fibo-last [n]
  (last (fibo-list n)))
```

This is a really elegant implementation that uses the lazy `iterate` function.

Scala has the parameterized `Stream[T]` class to represent a lazy list.
Here's what a Scala Fibonacci stream looks like.

```scala
object Fibo {
  lazy val fibo: Stream[BigInt] =
    BigInt(0) #::
    BigInt(1) #::
    fibo.zip(fibo.tail).map { n => n._1 + n._2 }

  def fiboList = fibo.take(_: Int).toList

  def fiboLast = fiboList(_: Int).last
}

```

This implementation uses the lazy right-associative `#::` function, which is actually the `Stream.cons` method.
There's also an implicit conversion from a sequence to a stream, from the `Stream` companion object.
I'm sure Haskell programmers will eagerly point out the need for a `zipWith` function.

Let's look at how these two implementations match up against eachother in terms of performance.
In Clojure, the `time` macro can be used to measure the time taken to evaluate a form.
There's really no equivalent in Scala, so let's implement our own.
We should be able to simply say `time(fiboLast(n))`, for example.

```scala
def time[R](block: => R): R = {
  val t0 = System.currentTimeMillis
  val result = block
  val t1 = System.currentTimeMillis

  println("Elapsed time: " + (t1 - t0) + "ms")
  result
}

```

Note that the time taken to print the result of a statement in the REPL shouldn't be measured.
We can ensure this by binding the result to a variable.
This is done by using `val fibo = time(fiboLast(5000)` in Scala, and `(time (def fibo (fibo-last 5000)))` in Clojure, for example.
Memory usage can be ignored, as the GC is invoked unpredictably.

And here are the results!

<div id="postchart" class="chart"></div>
<script type="text/javascript" src="lazy-sequences-and-streams/jquery.flot.min.js" defer></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="lazy-sequences-and-streams/chart.js" defer></script>

A weird observation in the Scala implementation is that `fiboList(1)` takes 8-10 milliseconds to evaluate.
But Scala actually performs better on average, which is mostly due to the use of static types.

Interestingly, the Clojure `fibo-list` function evaluates in constant time, which is less than a millisecond!
Clojure also fetches cached elements in the lazy sequence much faster than Scala.
However, `fibo-last` performs linearly since the `last` function has linear time-complexity.
